Implement the default registry in the spec (#659)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/registry.md

of type `cardinal`. See [charts](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/latest/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html)
for examples.

If the option `select` is set to `ordinal`, selection should be based on CLDR plural rule data
of type `ordinal`. See [charts](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/latest/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html)
for examples.

Apply the rules defined by CLDR to the resolved value of the operand and the function options,
and return the resulting keyword.
If no rules match, return `other`.

> **Example.**
> In CLDR 44, the Czech (`cs`) plural rule set can be found
> [here](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/44/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html#cs).
>
> A message in Czech might be:
> ```
> .match {$numDays :number}
> one  {{{$numDays} den}}
> few  {{{$numDays} dny}}
> many {{{$numDays} dne}}
> *    {{{$numDays} dní}}
> ```
> Using the rules found above, the results of various `operand` values might look like:
> | Operand value | Keyword | Formatted Message |
> |---|---|---|
> | 1 | `one` | 1 den |
> | 2 | `few` | 2 dny |
> | 5 | `other` | 5 dní |
> | 22 | `few` | 22 dny |
> | 27 | `other` | 27 dní |
> | 2.4 | `many` | 2,4 dne |

> ### Determining Exact Literal Match

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Determining Exact Literal Match
```

> Feedback describing use cases for fractional and significant digits-based
> selection would be helpful.
> Otherwise, users should avoid using matching with fractional numbers or significant digits.

## Date and Time Value Formatting

This subsection describes the functions and options for date/time formatting.
Selection based on date and time values is not required in this release.

### Functions

Functions for formatting [date/time values](#operands) in the default registry are:

- `:datetime`
- `:date`
- `:time`

If no options are specified, each of the functions defaults to the following:
- `{$d :datetime}` is the same as `{$d :datetime dateStyle=short timeStyle=short}`
- `{$d :date}` is the same as `{$d :date style=short}`
- `{$t :time}` is the same as `{$t :time style=short}`

> [!NOTE]
> Pattern selection based on date/time values is a complex topic and no support for this
> is required in this release.

> [!NOTE]
> The default formatting behavior of `:datetime` is inconsistent with `Intl.DateTimeFormat`
> in JavaScript and with `{d,date}` in ICU MessageFormat 1.0.
> This is because, unlike those implementations, `:datetime` is distinct from `:date` and `:time`.

> #### Operands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Operands
```

> .input {$object :noun case=nominative}
> {{You see {$color :adjective article=indefinite accord=$object} {$object}!}}
>```

# Default Registry

This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide to be conformant with
this specification.

## String Value Selection and Formatting

(Pending)

## Numeric Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

The function `:number` is the default selector and formatter for numeric values.

The function `:integer` provides a reduced set of options for selecting
and formatting numeric values as integers.

### Operands

The _operand_ of a number function is either an implementation-defined type or
a literal that matches the `number-literal` production in the [ABNF](/spec/message.abnf).

> All other values produce a _Resolution Error_.

Reviewer 2: This is inconsistent with Date and Time Value Formatting:
> All other _operand_ values produce a _Selection Error_ when evaluated for selection or a _Formatting Error_ when formatting the value.

Author: If we didn't correct date/time previously, I will do so. This was a discussion with @eemeli. The _Resolution Error_ is what comes first.

> All other values produce a _Resolution Error_.

Author: Yes, we do! See the folder 'test' in our repo. I have filed an issue to capture this comment.

> or classes according to their local needs.

> [!NOTE]
> String values passed as variables in the _formatting context_'s
> _input mapping_ can be formatted as numeric values as long as their
> contents match the `number-literal` production in the [ABNF](/main/spec/message.abnf).
>
> For example, if the value of the variable `num` were the string
> `-1234.567`, it would behave identically to the local
> variable in this example:
> ```
> .local $example = {|-1234.567| :number}
> {{{$num :number} == {$example}}}
> ```

> [!NOTE]
> Implementations are encouraged to provide support for compound types or data structures
> that provide additional semantic meaning to the formatting of number-like values.
> For example, in ICU4J, the type `com.ibm.icu.util.Measure` can be used to communicate
> a value that include a unit
> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Options

The following options and their values are required in the default registry to be available on the 
function `:number`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `ordinal`
   -  `exact`

 
> [!IMPORTANT]

> > **Default Value of `select` Option**

Author: Will fix.

>
> The value `plural` is default for the option `select` 
> because it is the most common use case for numeric selection.
> It can be used for exact value matches but also allows for the grammatical needs of other 
> languages using CLDR's plural rules.
> This might not be noticeable in the source language (particularly English), 
> but can cause problems in target locales that the original developer is not considering.
>
> For example, a naive developer might use a special message for the value `1` without
> considering other locale's need for a `one` plural:
>
>```
> .match {$var}
> 1   {{You have one last chance}}
> one {{You have {$var} chance remaining}} // needed by languages such as Polish or Russian
>                                          // such locales typically require other keywords
>                                          // such as two, few, many, and so forth
> *   {{You have {$var} chances remaining}}
>```

> - `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)

Author: We don't do that for all of the other values--and sometimes this is very deliberate. We might refer to MDN or 402 for the compact display gunk, though, since otherwise this gives implementations the "freedom" to implement `short` and `long` but not other forms of `notation=compact`.

What this really argues for is: we should excommunicate `compactDisplay` and `notation` from Tech Preview and consider it for RGI instead. JS and ICU can implement as an extension. (Scientific and engineering notation are also specialized)

   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `scientific`
   - `engineering`
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `signDisplay`
   -  `auto` (default)
   -  `always`
   -  `exceptZero`
   -  `negative`
   -  `never`
- `style`
  - `decimal` (default)
  - `percent` (see [Percent Style](#percent-style) below)
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `never`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - (non-negative integer, default: `1`)

> > [!NOTE]
> > The following options do not have default values because they are only to be used
> > as overrides for an existing locale-and-value dependent implementation-defined
> > default
> 
> - `minimumFractionDigits`
>   - (non-negative integer)
> - `maximumFractionDigits`
>   - (non-negative integer)
> - `minimumSignificantDigits`
>   - (non-negative integer)
> - `maximumSignificantDigits`
>   - (non-negative integer)

Reviewer 2: I'm not convinced that this note is helpful; the same dynamic default behavior is also true of `numberingSystem`.
```suggestion
- `minimumFractionDigits`
  - (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
- `maximumFractionDigits`
  - (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
- `minimumSignificantDigits`
  - (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
```

Author: Could we instead put something above all of the options in a non-NOTE style that says something like:

> Some options do not have default values defined in this specification.
> The defaults for these options are implementation-dependent.
> In general, the defaults depend on the locale, the value of other options,
> or both.

Author: I implemented this. See what you think.

The following options and their values are required in the default registry to be available on the 

> function `:integer`:

Reviewer 2: Suggested restructuring (and likewise for Date and Time Value Formatting and other sections):

> ## Numeric Value Selection and Formatting
> …
> ### `:number`
> The function `:number` is the default selector and formatter for numeric values.
> 
> #### Operand
> See [Number Function Operands](#number-function-operands).
> 
> #### Options
> * all [Number Function Common Options](#number-function-options)
> * `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
>   * `short`
>   * `long`
> * `notation`
>   * `standard` (default)
>   * `scientific`
>   * `engineering`
>   * `compact`
> * `useGrouping`
>   * `auto` (default)
>   * `always`
>   * `never`
>   * `min2`
> * `minimumFractionDigits`
>   * (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
> * `maximumFractionDigits`
>   * (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
> * `minimumSignificantDigits`
>   * (non-negative integer) (default is implementation-dependent and may depend upon locale and/or value and/or other options)
> 
> ### `:integer`
> The function `:integer` provides a reduced set of options for selecting and formatting numeric values as integers.
> 
> #### Operand
> See [Number Function Operands](#number-function-operands).
> 
> #### Options
> * all [Number Function Common Options](#number-function-options)
> * `useGrouping`
>   * `auto` (default)
>   * `true`
>   * `false`
>   * `min2`
>   * `always`

- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `ordinal`
   -  `exact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `signDisplay`
   -  `auto` (default)
   -  `always`
   -  `exceptZero`
   -  `negative`
   -  `never`
- `style`
  - `decimal` (default)
  - `percent` (see [Percent Style](#percent-style) below)
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `true`
  - `false`
  - `min2`

>   - `always`

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity, what determines the order in which to display possible values?

Author: Ah... I see. I _did_ fix it---in `:number` but not in `:integer`. Glad you asked!

If no rules match, return `other`.

> **Example.**
> In CLDR 44, the Czech (`cs`) plural rule set can be found
> [here](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/44/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html#cs).
>
> A message in Czech might be:
> ```
> .match {$numDays :number}
> one  {{{$numDays} den}}
> few  {{{$numDays} dny}}
> many {{{$numDays} dne}}
> *    {{{$numDays} dní}}
> ```
> Using the rules found above, the results of various `operand` values might look like:
> | Operand value | Keyword | Formatted Message |
> |---|---|---|
> | 1 | `one` | 1 den |
> | 2 | `few` | 2 dny |
> | 5 | `other` | 5 dní |
> | 22 | `few` | 22 dny |
> | 27 | `other` | 27 dní |
> | 2.4 | `many` | 2,4 dne |

#### Determining Exact Literal Match

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The exact behavior of exact literal match is only defined for non-zero-filled
> integer values.
> Annotations that use fraction digits or significant digits might work in specific
> implementation-defined ways.
> Users should avoid depending on these types of keys in message selection.

Number literals in the MessageFormat 2 syntax use the 
[format defined for a JSON number](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259#section-6).

> The resolved value of an `operand` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`
> if, when the `operand` is serialized using the format for a JSON number
> the two strings are equal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resolved value of an `operand` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`
if, when the `operand` is serialized using the format for a JSON number,
the two strings are equal.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Implementations are not expected to implement this exactly as written,
> as there are clearly optimizations that can be applied.

> [!NOTE]
> Only integer matching is required in the Technical Preview.
> Feedback describing use cases for fractional and significant digits-based
> selection would be helpful.
> Otherwise, users should avoid using matching with fractional numbers or significant digits.

## Date and Time Value Formatting

This subsection describes the functions and options for date/time formatting.
Selection based on date and time values is not required in this release.

### Functions

Functions for formatting [date/time values](#operands) in the default registry are:

- `:datetime`
- `:date`
- `:time`

If no options are specified, each of the functions defaults to the following:
- `{$d :datetime}` is the same as `{$d :datetime dateStyle=short timeStyle=short}`
- `{$d :date}` is the same as `{$d :date style=short}`
- `{$t :time}` is the same as `{$t :time style=short}`

> > [!NOTE]
> > Pattern selection based on date/time values is a complex topic and no support for this
> > is required in this release.
> 

Reviewer 2: Redundant with text above.
```suggestion
```

> .input {$object :noun case=nominative}
> {{You see {$color :adjective article=indefinite accord=$object} {$object}!}}
>```

> # Default Registry for LDML45

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Default Registry
```

This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide to be conformant with

> the LDML45 Technical Preview of MessageFormat v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this specification.
```

## String Value Selection and Formatting

(Pending)

## Numeric Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

> The following functions use numeric selection:
> 
> The function `:number` is the default selector for numeric values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `:number` is the default selector and formatter for numeric values.
```

The function `:integer` provides a reduced set of options for selecting
and formatting numeric values as integers.

### Operands

The _operand_ of a number function is either an implementation-defined type or

> a literal that matches the `number-literal` production in the [ABNF](/main/spec/message.abnf).

Reviewer: As before, including `/main` in these links is invalid. So the same applies to all of them:
```suggestion
a literal that matches the `number-literal` production in the [ABNF](/spec/message.abnf).
```

All other values produce a _Selection Error_ when evaluated for selection

> or a _Formatting Error_ when attempting to format the value.

Reviewer: It's probably fine to not mention that these values will first emit a _Resolution Error_, and then because the whole expression resolves to a fallback value, we emit the above-mentioned further errors. Or should some of that be mentioned here?

Author: No, we should just say _Resolution Error_ here. Implementers need to know what to throw/emit and that's what they'll emit when parsing the literal.

```suggestion
All other values produce a _Resolution Error_.
```

> {{{$num :number} == {$example}}}
> ```

> [!NOTE]
> Implementations are encouraged to provide support for compound types or data structures
> that provide additional semantic meaning to the formatting of number-like values.
> For example, in ICU4J, the type `com.ibm.icu.util.Measure` can be used to communicate
> a value that include a unit
> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Options

The following options and their values are required in the default registry to be available on the 
function `:number`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `ordinal`
   -  `exact`

 
> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Default Value of `select` Option**
>
> The value `plural` is default for the option `select` 
> because it is the most common use case for numeric selection.
> It can be used for exact value matches but also allows for the grammatical needs of other 
> languages using CLDR's plural rules.
> This might not be noticeable in the source language (particularly English), 
> but can cause problems in target locales that the original developer is not considering.
>

> > > For example, a naive developer might use a special message for the value `1` without
> > > considering other locale's need for a `one` plural:
> > >
> > >```
> > > .match {$var}
> > > 1   {{You have one last chance}}
> > > one {{You have {$var} chance remaining}} // needed by languages such as Polish or Russian
> > >                                          // such locales typically require other keywords
> > >                                          // such as two, few, many, and so forth
> > > *   {{You have {$var} chances remaining}}
> > >```

Reviewer: This shouldn't need a second indentation level.

```suggestion
> For example, a naive developer might use a special message for the value `1` without
> considering other locale's need for a `one` plural:
>
>```
> .match {$var}
> 1   {{You have one last chance}}
> one {{You have {$var} chance remaining}} // needed by languages such as Polish or Russian
>                                          // such locales typically require other keywords
>                                          // such as two, few, many, and so forth
> *   {{You have {$var} chances remaining}}
>```
```

> - `compactDisplay` // this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `compactDisplay` (this option only has meaning when combined with the option `notation=compact`)
```

   - `short` (default)
   - `long`
- `notation`
   - `standard` (default)
   - `scientific`
   - `engineering`
   - `compact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `signDisplay`
   -  `auto` (default)
   -  `always`
   -  `exceptZero`
   -  `negative`
   -  `never`
- `style`
  - `decimal` (default)
  - `percent` (see [Percent Style](#percent-style) below)
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `never`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - (non-negative integer, default: `1`)

>   - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

- `minimumFractionDigits`
  - (non-negative integer)
- `maximumFractionDigits`
  - (non-negative integer)
- `minimumSignificantDigits`
  - (non-negative integer)
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - (non-negative integer)

The following options and their values are required in the default registry to be available on the 
function `:integer`:
- `select`
   -  `plural` (default)
   -  `ordinal`
   -  `exact`
- `numberingSystem`
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
     (default is locale-specific)
- `signDisplay`
   -  `auto` (default)
   -  `always`
   -  `exceptZero`
   -  `negative`
   -  `never`
- `style`
  - `decimal` (default)
  - `percent` (see [Percent Style](#percent-style) below)
- `useGrouping`
  - `auto` (default)
  - `true`
  - `false`
  - `min2`
  - `always`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - (non-negative integer, default: `1`)

> [!NOTE]
> The following option does not have a default value because it is only to be used
> as an override for an existing locale-and-value dependent implementation-defined
> default

- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - (non-negative integer)

> [!NOTE]

> > The following options or option values are being developed during the Technical Preview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The following options and option values are being developed during the Technical Preview
```

> period.

The following values for the option `style` are _not_ part of the default registry.
Implementations SHOULD avoid creating options that conflict with these, but
are encouraged to track development of these options during Tech Preview:
- `currency`
- `unit`

The following options are _not_ part of the default registry.
Implementations SHOULD avoid creating options that conflict with these, but
are encouraged to track development of these options during Tech Preview:
- `currency`
   - valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
     (no default)
- `currencyDisplay`
   - `symbol` (default)
   - `narrowSymbol`
   - `code`
   - `name`
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)
- `unit`
   - (anything not empty)
- `unitDisplay`
   - `long`
   - `short` (default)
   - `narrow`

### Percent Style

> When implementing `style=percent`, the numeric value of the _operand_ 
> MUST be divided by 100 for the purposes of formatting.
> 
> > For example,
> > `The total was {|100| :number style=percent}.` should format
> > in a manner similar to:
> > > The total was 1%.

Reviewer: We got this wrong when discussing it in the meeting, the numbers should be _multiplied_ for formatting so e.g. `0.5` is formatted as "50%".

Also, all the other examples use code blocks, rather than being inline.

```suggestion
When implementing `style=percent`, the numeric value of the _operand_ 
MUST be multiplied by 100 for the purposes of formatting.

> For example,
> ```
> The total was {0.5 :number style=percent}.
> ```
> should format in a manner similar to:
> > The total was 50%.
```

### Selection

Number selection has three modes:
- `exact` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
- `plural` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
  or to plural rule categories if there is no explicit match
- `ordinal` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
  or to ordinal rule categories if there is no explicit match

> When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys`](spec/formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys`](formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 
```

numeric selectors perform as described below.

- Let `return_value` be a new empty list of strings.
- Let `operand` be the resolved value of the _operand_.
  If the `operand` is not a number type, emit a _Selection Error_
  and return `return_value`.
- Let `keys` be a list of strings containing keys to match.
  (Hint: this list is an argument to `MatchSelectorKeys`)
- For each string `key` in `keys`:
   - If the value of `key` matches the production `number-literal`:
     - If the parsed value of `key` is an [exact match](#determining-exact-literal-match)
       of the value of the `operand`, then `key` matches the selector.
       Add `key` to the front of the `return_value` list.
   - Else, if the value of `key` is a keyword:
      - Let `keyword` be a string which is the result of [rule selection](#rule-selection).
      - If `keyword` equals `key`, then `key` matches the selector.
        Append `key` to the end of the `return_value` list.
   - Else, `key` is invalid;
     emit a _Selection Error_.
     Do not add `key` to `return_value`
- Return `return_value`

> ### Plural/Ordinal Keywords

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Plural/Ordinal Keywords
```

Author: This is intended to be a subsection of `selection`, not on the same level?

Reviewer: Exactly, and Selection has `###` so this needs `####`.

The _plural/ordinal keywords_ are: `zero`, `one`, `two`, `few`, `many`, and
`other`.

> ### Rule Selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Rule Selection
```

> integer values.
> Annotations that use fraction digits or significant digits might work in specific
> implementation-defined ways.
> Users should avoid depending on these types of keys in message selection.

Number literals in the MessageFormat 2 syntax use the 
[format defined for a JSON number](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259#section-6).
The resolved value of an `operand` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`
if, when the `operand` is serialized using the format for a JSON number
the two strings are equal.

> [!NOTE]
> Implementations are not expected to implement this exactly as written,
> as there are clearly optimizations that can be applied.

> [!NOTE]
> Only integer matching is required in the Technical Preview.
> Feedback describing use cases for fractional and significant digits-based
> selection would be helpful.
> Otherwise, users should avoid using matching with fractional numbers or significant digits.

## Date and Time Value Formatting

This subsection describes the functions and options for date/time formatting.
Selection based on date and time values is not required in this release.

> #### Functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Functions
```

Functions for formatting [date/time values](#operands) in the default registry are:

- `:datetime`
- `:date`
- `:time`

If no options are specified, each of the functions defaults to the following:
- `{$d :datetime}` is the same as `{$d :datetime dateStyle=short timeStyle=short}`
- `{$d :date}` is the same as `{$d :date style=short}`
- `{$t :time}` is the same as `{$t :time style=short}`

> [!NOTE]
> Pattern selection based on date/time values is a complex topic and no support for this
> is required in this release.

> [!NOTE]
> The default formatting behavior of `:datetime` is inconsistent with `Intl.DateTimeFormat`

> > in JavaScript and with `{d,date}` in MessageFormat v1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> in JavaScript and with `{d,date}` in ICU MessageFormat 1.0.
```
as per https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/3e30503810046b123267e1cc8b86e0b632f446d9/spec/README.md?plain=1#L54-L55

> This is because, unlike those implementations, `:datetime` is distinct from `:date` and `:time`.

#### Operands

The _operand_ of a date/time function is either 
an implementation-defined date/time type (passed in as an argument)
or a _date/time literal value_, as defined below.
All other _operand_ values produce a _Selection Error_ when evaluated for selection

> or a _Formatting Error_ when formatting the value.

Reviewer: Same as with `:number`, these errors are emitted because we first emit a _Resolution Error_ and end up with a fallback value.

Author: ```suggestion
All other _operand_ values produce a _Selection Error_.
```

Author: Actually, we're both wrong. This is a failure inside the function, so it's Invalid Expression.

A **_<dfn>date/time literal value</dfn>_** is a non-empty string consisting of 
one of the following:
- an XMLSchema 1.1 [dateTime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime)
- an XMLSchema 1.1 [time](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#time)
- an XMLSchema 1.1 [date](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#date)

The `timezoneOffset` of each of these formats is optional. 
When the offset is not present, implementations should use a floating time type
(such as Java's `java.time.LocalDateTime`) to represent the time value.
For more information, see [Working with Timezones](https://w3c.github.io/timezone).

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > The [ABNF](/spec/message.abnf) and [syntax](/spec/syntax.md) of MFv2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The [ABNF](/spec/message.abnf) and [syntax](/spec/syntax.md) of MF2
```

> do not formally define date/time literals. 
> This means that a _message_ can be syntactically valid but produce
> an _Operand Mismatch Error_ at runtime.

> [!NOTE]
> String values passed as variables in the _formatting context_'s
> _input mapping_ can be formatted as date/time values as long as their
> contents are date/time literals.
>
> For example, if the value of the variable `now` were the string
> `2024-02-06T16:40:00Z`, it would behave identically to the local
> variable in this example:
> ```
> .local $example = {|2024-02-06T16:40:00Z| :datetime}
> {{{$now :datetime} == {$example}}}
> ```

> [!NOTE]
> True time zone support in serializations is expected to coincide with the adoption
> of Temporal in JavaScript.
> The form of these serializations is known and is a de facto standard.
> Support for these extensions is expected to be required in the post-tech preview.
> See: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sedate-datetime-extended/

> #### Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Options
```

A function can use either the appropriate _style_ options for that function
or can use a collection of _field options_ (but not both) to control the formatted 
output.

If both are specified, an _Invalid Expression_ error MUST be emitted
and a _fallback value_ used as the resolved value of the _expression_.

> ##### Style Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Style Options
```

The function `:datetime` has these function-specific _style_ options.
- `dateStyle`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short`
- `timeStyle`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short`

The function `:date` has these function-specific _style_ options:
- `style`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short` (default)

The function `:time` has these function-specific _style_ options:
- `style`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short` (default)

> ##### Field Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Field Options
```

and what format to use for that field.
The implementation may use this _annotation_ to configure which fields
appear in the formatted output.

> [!NOTE]
> Field options do not have default values because they are only to be used
> to compose the formatter.

The _field_ options are defined as follows:

The function `:datetime` has the following options:
- `weekday`
  - `long`
  - `short`
  - `narrow`
- `era`
  - `long`
  - `short`
  - `narrow`
- `year`
  - `numeric`
  - `2-digit`
- `month`
  - `numeric`
  - `2-digit`
  - `long`
  - `short`
  - `narrow`
- `day`
  - `numeric`
  - `2-digit`
- `hour`
  - `numeric`
  - `2-digit`
- `minute`
  - `numeric`
  - `2-digit`
- `second`
  - `numeric`
  - `2-digit`
- `fractionalSecondDigits`
  - `1`
  - `2`
  - `3`
- `hourCycle` (default is locale-specific)
  - `h11`
  - `h12`
  - `h23`
  - `h24`
- `timeZoneName`
  - `long`
  - `short`
  - `shortOffset`
  - `longOffset`
  - `shortGeneric`
  - `longGeneric`

> [!NOTE]
> The following options do not have default values because they are only to be used
> as overrides for locale-and-value dependent implementation-defined defaults.

> The followind date/time options are *not* part of the default registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following date/time options are **not** part of the default registry.
```

Implementations SHOULD avoid creating options that conflict with these, but
are encouraged to track development of these options during Tech Preview:
- `calendar` (default is locale-specific)
  - valid [Unicode Calendar Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCalendarIdentifier)
- `numberingSystem` (default is locale-specific)
   - valid [Unicode Number System Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeNumberSystemIdentifier)
- `timeZone` (default is system default time zone or UTC)
  - valid identifier per [BCP175](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6557)

> #### Selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Selection
```

> Selection based on date/time types is not required by MFv2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selection based on date/time types is not required by MF2.
```

> .input {$object :noun case=nominative}
> {{You see {$color :adjective article=indefinite accord=$object} {$object}!}}
>```

# Default Registry

> This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide to be conformant with
> this specification.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide
to be conformant with this specification.
```

## String Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

The following functions are provided:

The function `:string` provides string selection and formatting.

### Operands

> The _operand_ is any literal or an implementation-defined set of string or

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should use the term "string" or "string literal" here (and include a definition of "string literal" as an arbitrary string which the formatting function may parse in any way) to avoid confusion with `Literal` in the grammar.

Author: Actually, this text really **_means_** the production `Literal` in the grammar. The operand is any such literal _or_ implementation defined types.

Reviewer 3: What's confusing me is that there are several different meanings of "literal":

* any string
* a data model node representing a `Literal` node in the tree
* a string that is generated by one of the following three productions in the grammar: `*(quoted-char / quoted-escape)`; `name` or `number-literal`

Put differently, the string "|1|" is a valid syntactic representation of a number literal, but not a valid argument to the number formatter.

Reviewer 3: `{|1| :number}` is valid syntax. But the implementation parses `|1|` into a `Literal` data model node (or does something observably the same), and is then responsible for extracting the string "1" from that node and passing it into the runtime function that implements `:number`. If it passed the string `|1|` to `:number` instead, that wouldn't be spec-compliant.

Author: I think we're saying the same thing? The literal value of `|1|` is the string `1` and doesn't include the quoting pipe symbols. Does my suggestion help express that? What should I change?

Reviewer 3: See the suggestion I made (at the same time as you wrote this comment :)

character-sequence types.

> [!NOTE]
> This should probably include individual character types, such as `char`.

In addition, implementations MAY perform formatting and selection on 

> `operand` values that do not otherwise have a formatting function registered.

Reviewer 3: Is this saying that the `:string` formatter/selector may be used as a "default" by the implementation? If so, it's a little confusing because it's unclear whether to read the sentence that way, or read it to mean that the implementation of `:string` may do arbitrary formatting on its operand.

### Options

The function `:string` has no options.

> [!NOTE]
> Proposals for string transformation options or implementation
> experience with user requirements is desired during the Tech Preview.

### Selection

> When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys`](spec/formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys(rv, keys)`](spec/formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 
```

the `:string` selector performs as described below.

- Let `return_value` be a new empty list of strings.

> - Let `operand` be the resolved value of the _operand_.
>   If the `operand` is not a string literal, convert the value to a string literal,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Let `operand` be _rv_.
If `operand` is not a string literal, let `operand` be
the result of converting `operand` to a string literal.
```

(See above suggestoin)

  or, optionally: emit a _Selection Error_ and return `return_value`.
- Let `keys` be a list of strings containing keys to match.

>   (Hint: this list is an argument to `MatchSelectorKeys`)

Reviewer 3: These two lines can be deleted if my previous suggestion is used (including the argument names to `MatchSelectorKeys` above. That would make it clearer what's an argument to the procedure and what's a local variable.

- For each string `key` in `keys`:

>    - If the value of `key` is equal to the string value of `operand`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - If the value of `key` is equal to `operand`
```

`operand` is already a string value

     then `key` matches the selector.

>      A `key` and an `operand` are equal if they consist of the same

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Two strings are equal if they consist of the same
```

     sequence of Unicode code points.

>      Add `key` to the front of the `return_value` list.

Reviewer 3: I think this is wrong. The `return_value` list should have length 0 or 1, per this part of the formatting spec:

"The returned list MUST contain only unique elements of the input list `keys`."

The only way that `return_value` could have length > 1 is if it includes duplicates, since all of the elements in the list must be equal to each other (given the previous step).

Author: The list can have duplicates. Consider:

```
.match {$foo :string}{$num :integer}
foo 0   {{You have no foo}}
foo one {{You have {$num} foo}}
foo *   {{You have {$num} foo}}
*   0   {{You have no {$foo}}}
*   one {{You have {$num} {$foo}}}
*   *   {{You have {$num} {$foo}}}
```

> - Return `return_value`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Return `return_value`.
```

> in each string.
> As a result, variations in how text can be encoded can affect the performance of matching.
> The function `:string` does not perform case folding or Unicode Normalization of string values.

> [!NOTE]
> Unquoted string literals in a _variant_ do not include spaces.
> If users wish to match strings that include whitespace
> (including U+3000 `IDEOGRAPHIC SPACE`)
> to a key, the `key` needs to be quoted.
>
> For example:
>```
> .match {$string :string}
> | space key | {{Matches the string " space key "}}
> *             {{Matches the string "space key"}}
>```

### Formatting

The `:string` function returns the string value of the resolved value of the _operand_.

## Numeric Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

The function `:number` is the default selector and formatter for numeric values.

The function `:integer` provides a reduced set of options for selecting
and formatting numeric values as integers.

### Operands

The _operand_ of a number function is either an implementation-defined type or
a literal whose contents match the `number-literal` production in the [ABNF](/spec/message.abnf).

> All other values produce a _Resolution Error_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All other values produce an _Invalid Expression Error_.
```

Per #630

  - `auto` (default)
  - `always`
  - `min2`
- `minimumIntegerDigits`
  - (non-negative integer, default: `1`)
- `maximumSignificantDigits`
  - (non-negative integer)

> [!NOTE]
> The following options and option values are being developed during the Technical Preview
> period.

The following values for the option `style` are _not_ part of the default registry.
Implementations SHOULD avoid creating options that conflict with these, but
are encouraged to track development of these options during Tech Preview:
- `currency`
- `unit`

The following options are _not_ part of the default registry.
Implementations SHOULD avoid creating options that conflict with these, but
are encouraged to track development of these options during Tech Preview:
- `currency`
   - valid [Unicode Currency Identifier](https://cldr-smoke.unicode.org/spec/main/ldml/tr35.html#UnicodeCurrencyIdentifier)
     (no default)
- `currencyDisplay`
   - `symbol` (default)
   - `narrowSymbol`
   - `code`
   - `name`
- `currencySign`
  - `accounting`
  - `standard` (default)
- `unit`
   - (anything not empty)
- `unitDisplay`
   - `long`
   - `short` (default)
   - `narrow`

#### Default Value of `select` Option

> The value `plural` is default for the option `select` 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The value `plural` is the default for the option `select` 
```

For example, a naive developer might use a special message for the value `1` without
considering a locale's need for a `one` plural:
```
.match {$var}
1   {{You have one last chance}}
one {{You have {$var} chance remaining}} // needed by languages such as Polish or Russian
                                         // such locales typically require other keywords
                                         // such as two, few, many, and so forth
*   {{You have {$var} chances remaining}}
```

#### Percent Style
When implementing `style=percent`, the numeric value of the _operand_ 
MUST be multiplied by 100 for the purposes of formatting.

> For example,
> ```
> The total was {0.5 :number style=percent}.
> ```
> should format in a manner similar to:
> > The total was 50%.

### Selection

Number selection has three modes:
- `exact` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
- `plural` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
  or to plural rule categories if there is no explicit match
- `ordinal` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
  or to ordinal rule categories if there is no explicit match

> When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys`](formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 

Reviewer 3: Same general suggestions as the ones I made for `:string` (name the arguments here, then refer to them below)

numeric selectors perform as described below.

- Let `return_value` be a new empty list of strings.
- Let `operand` be the resolved value of the _operand_.
  If the `operand` is not a number type, emit a _Selection Error_
  and return `return_value`.
- Let `keys` be a list of strings containing keys to match.
  (Hint: this list is an argument to `MatchSelectorKeys`)
- For each string `key` in `keys`:
   - If the value of `key` matches the production `number-literal`:
     - If the parsed value of `key` is an [exact match](#determining-exact-literal-match)
       of the value of the `operand`, then `key` matches the selector.

>        Add `key` to the front of the `return_value` list.

Reviewer 3: Duplicates?

   - Else, if the value of `key` is a keyword:
      - Let `keyword` be a string which is the result of [rule selection](#rule-selection).
      - If `keyword` equals `key`, then `key` matches the selector.

>         Append `key` to the end of the `return_value` list.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        Append `key` onto the `return_value` list.
```

   - Else, `key` is invalid;
     emit a _Selection Error_.

>      Do not add `key` to `return_value`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     Do not add `key` to `return_value`.
```

> - Return `return_value`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Return `return_value`.
```

#### Plural/Ordinal Keywords
The _plural/ordinal keywords_ are: `zero`, `one`, `two`, `few`, `many`, and
`other`.

#### Rule Selection

If the option `select` is set to `exact`, rule-based selection is not used.
Return the empty string.

> [!NOTE]
> Since keys cannot be the empty string in a numeric selector, returning the

> > empty string disables keyword selection

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> empty string disables keyword selection.
```

> ```
> .match {$numDays :number}
> one  {{{$numDays} den}}
> few  {{{$numDays} dny}}
> many {{{$numDays} dne}}
> *    {{{$numDays} dní}}
> ```
> Using the rules found above, the results of various `operand` values might look like:
> | Operand value | Keyword | Formatted Message |
> |---|---|---|
> | 1 | `one` | 1 den |
> | 2 | `few` | 2 dny |
> | 5 | `other` | 5 dní |
> | 22 | `few` | 22 dny |
> | 27 | `other` | 27 dní |
> | 2.4 | `many` | 2,4 dne |

#### Determining Exact Literal Match

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The exact behavior of exact literal match is only defined for non-zero-filled
> integer values.
> Annotations that use fraction digits or significant digits might work in specific
> implementation-defined ways.
> Users should avoid depending on these types of keys in message selection.

Number literals in the MessageFormat 2 syntax use the 
[format defined for a JSON number](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259#section-6).
The resolved value of an `operand` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`
if, when the `operand` is serialized using the format for a JSON number,
the two strings are equal.

> [!NOTE]
> Implementations are not expected to implement this exactly as written,

> > as there are clearly optimizations that can be applied.

Reviewer 3: Add something about how the observable behavior must be the same as what is written?

Author: ```suggestion
as there are clearly optimizations that can be applied.
However, the observed behavior must be consistent with what is described here.
```

### Functions

Functions for formatting [date/time values](#operands) in the default registry are:

- `:datetime`
- `:date`
- `:time`

If no options are specified, each of the functions defaults to the following:
- `{$d :datetime}` is the same as `{$d :datetime dateStyle=short timeStyle=short}`
- `{$d :date}` is the same as `{$d :date style=short}`
- `{$t :time}` is the same as `{$t :time style=short}`

> [!NOTE]
> The default formatting behavior of `:datetime` is inconsistent with `Intl.DateTimeFormat`
> in JavaScript and with `{d,date}` in ICU MessageFormat 1.0.
> This is because, unlike those implementations, `:datetime` is distinct from `:date` and `:time`.

### Operands

The _operand_ of a date/time function is either 
an implementation-defined date/time type (passed in as an argument)
or a _date/time literal value_, as defined below.
All other _operand_ values produce a _Selection Error_.

A **_<dfn>date/time literal value</dfn>_** is a non-empty string consisting of 
one of the following:
- an XMLSchema 1.1 [dateTime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime)
- an XMLSchema 1.1 [time](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#time)

> - an XMLSchema 1.1 [date](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#date)

Reviewer: We should clarify which functions take which of these values. All can't be valid for all, as e.g. an XML time is insufficient input for `:date`.

Also, are any timezones in literal inputs used in the formatted outputs? For example, when formatting
```
{12:34+06:00 :time}
```
is the resulting formatted time in the system timezone, or in +06?

How about UTC, what timezone does this render in?
```
{12:34Z :time}
```

As we've left out `timeZone` from the available options, also leaving out timezone parsing would be one way to resolve this.

Author: Oh boy, where do I start? 😈 

The values can parse into various kinds of date/time objects. Many (most?) of these can be formatted by any of the functions given here, although the results may be not be very useful. Specifically, a `time` formatted as a date or a `date` formatted as a time is probably not very interesting.

XMLSchema date/time values _do not have timezones_. They only support _zone offsets_. The only zone offset that can be 100% certainly made into a time zone is `Z` because that one means "UTC".

The time zone is very important in rendering date and time values. I argued at length in the previous PR (and tried to make the point in the call) that we should not excommunicate `timezone` as an option to "future". Without that option, there are only the following options for managing time zone in formatting:

- the implementation uses the system default
- the implementation provides an API for setting the time zone of an entire message
  (this is not a behavior we specify because it is beyond our remit, although probably
  we should point it out)
- the implementation assumes UTC

In addition, date/time _literals_ with no offset should be handled as floating time values (even if the implementation uses some specific time zone, the value should be formatted so that the field values don't change--often this is done using UTC as the time zone, ignoring local settings)

Note well that "time zone parsing" doesn't exist here. The _zone offset_ (usually include `Z`) parses into the underlying incremental ("instant") value. That is, all of the following are the *same* time value:

- `2007-01-01T01:00:00.000-01:00`
- `2007-01-01T01:00:00.000Z` 
- `2007-01-01T01:00:00.000+01:00` 
- `2006-12-31T23:00:00.000-01:00`

Literals missing one part should be permitted to treat that part as `0`. Some examples:

| Literal | Pattern | Output | Comment |
|---|---|---|---|
| `2024-02-17` | `{$d :datetime dateStyle=medium}` | Feb 17, 2024 00:00 a.m. | No time; treat as floating |
| `12:34:56.000` | {$d :datetime dateStyle=medium}` | Jan 1, 1970 12:34 p.m. | No date; treat as floating |
| `2024-02-17T12:34:56.000Z` | {$d :dateTime dateStyle=medium} | Feb 17, 2024 4:34:56 a.m. Pacific | Surprised? |
| `2024-02-17T12:34:56.000-08:00` | {$d :dateTime dateStyle=medium} | Feb 17, 2024 12:34 p.m. Pacific | |

If we didn't do this, users used to working with partial values would have messages fail instead of doing what their code usually does. The group will need to decide if we bring `timeZone` back in Tech Preview. We should also discuss whether to specify any of this behavior.

Some of what I express above might be controversial, in that we could make different decisions about forcing floating time behavior or permitting partial values.

Author: Note to @eemeli... see disconnected conversation below ⬇️

> .input {$object :noun case=nominative}
> {{You see {$color :adjective article=indefinite accord=$object} {$object}!}}
>```

# Default Registry

This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide
to be conformant with this specification.

## String Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

The following functions are provided:

The function `:string` provides string selection and formatting.

### Operands

> The _operand_ is any literal or an implementation-defined set of string or

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The _operand_ is any string generated by the
`*(quoted-char / quoted-escape)`, `name`, or `number-literal` productions in the grammar;
or an implementation-defined set of string or
```

Author: I see what you're doing!

The `name` or `number-literal` productions are narrower than the first description (which is the guts of a quoted literal). That narrower production defines what's allowed in an unquoted literal, which has no real bearing here (it's a detail of the syntax). 

The verb "generated" also bothers me, as one doesn't generate the operand. I kind of want to say the "resolved value of a _literal_", since one of the things that should happen is that the `quoted-escape` becomes unescaped in the data-model or in-memory representation. It's only escaped in the syntax to avoid conflicting with the grammar.

Perhaps:

```suggestion
The _operand_ is any _literal_'s value less any quotes and with any `quoted-escape` sequences
converted to their escaped characters
or an implementation-defined set of string or
```

We should add an example too.

Author: I rewrote and added an example. Thanks!

Reviewer 4: I was confused as to what you meant by a 'resolved value', and could see two possible interpretations. My comment was specific to :string (because as you say the results are always string comparisons anyway).

The spec always has to work in terms of strings, because it knows nothing about datatypes, and can't require particular datatypes because they vary by environment and implementation capabilities.

However, I would expect many MF2 implementations to actually operate with inputs that are not strings, but rather datatypes: both primitive and non-primitive. We can't have a spec that precludes implementations of MF2 from doing that. And those implementations will want to keep the values in datatypes where feasible, instead of always stringifying.

So, for example, it should be possible for an implementation to compile a MF2 into a data structure whereby when it knows that $input is a long, it can convert a literal for matching also into a long in that data structure, and just do long comparison.

Similarly, for plural matching, the compiled data structure could contain an enum value `few', instead of converting the an internal value for the plural category into a string and then doing a string comparison.

> .input {$object :noun case=nominative}
> {{You see {$color :adjective article=indefinite accord=$object} {$object}!}}
>```

# Default Registry

This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide
to be conformant with this specification.

## String Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

The following functions are provided:

The function `:string` provides string selection and formatting.

### Operands

The _operand_ is any _literal_ value
or an implementation-defined set of string or character-sequence types.
The value of a _literal_ does not include any quotes around the _literal_ and 
has converted any `quoted-escape` sequences to the escaped characters.
It does include any enclosed spaces or control characters.

> Examples of _literals_ and their values:
> | Literal | Value | Notes |
> |---|---|---|
> | \|1\| | `1` | Does not include quotes `\|` |
> | \|ab\\\|cd\| | `ab\|cd` | Unescape escaped `\|` |
> | hello | `hello` | Unquoted literal |
> | -13.2 | `-13.2` | Unquoted number-literal |
> | \| spaces \| | ` spaces ` | Includes one space before and after |

> [!NOTE]

> > This should probably include individual character types, such as `char`.

Author: That's exactly what I mean: don't overlook `char` and `java.lang.Character`

### Selection

When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys(rv, keys)`](spec/formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 
the `:string` selector performs as described below.

- Let `return_value` be a new empty list of strings.
- Let `operand` be _rv_.
If `operand` is not a string literal, let `operand` be
the result of converting `operand` to a string literal.
  or, optionally: emit a _Selection Error_ and return `return_value`.
- Let `keys` be a list of strings containing keys to match.
  (Hint: this list is an argument to `MatchSelectorKeys`)
- For each string `key` in `keys`:
   - If the value of `key` is equal to the string value of `operand`
     then `key` matches the selector.
     A `key` and an `operand` are equal if they consist of the same
     sequence of Unicode code points.
     Add `key` to the front of the `return_value` list.
- Return `return_value`.

> [!NOTE]
> Matching of `key` and `operand` values is sensitive to the sequence of code points
> in each string.
> As a result, variations in how text can be encoded can affect the performance of matching.
> The function `:string` does not perform case folding or Unicode Normalization of string values.

> 

Author: https://www.w3.org/TR/charmod-norm/

Requiring implementations to do normalization can be a big ask (I spent a long time at W3C asking...) and there are counterarguments. We should certainly **recommend** that users stick to normalized sequences. That is what this note is trying to do. We can mention NFC here if you think that would help.

> 

Reviewer 4: Yes, I think that would be useful. (I wasn't proposing requiring it.)

> 

Author: > I would also appreciate a recommendation for NFC normalization specifically for this comparison.

If you mean requiring or suggesting that implementations normalize the key and value when performing the comparison, it is important that implementations **NOT** do that. That would make implementations work differently depending on whether they normalize or not.

If no rules match, return `other`.

> **Example.**
> In CLDR 44, the Czech (`cs`) plural rule set can be found
> [here](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/44/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html#cs).
>
> A message in Czech might be:
> ```
> .match {$numDays :number}
> one  {{{$numDays} den}}
> few  {{{$numDays} dny}}
> many {{{$numDays} dne}}
> *    {{{$numDays} dní}}
> ```
> Using the rules found above, the results of various `operand` values might look like:
> | Operand value | Keyword | Formatted Message |
> |---|---|---|
> | 1 | `one` | 1 den |
> | 2 | `few` | 2 dny |
> | 5 | `other` | 5 dní |
> | 22 | `few` | 22 dny |
> | 27 | `other` | 27 dní |
> | 2.4 | `many` | 2,4 dne |

#### Determining Exact Literal Match

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The exact behavior of exact literal match is only defined for non-zero-filled
> integer values.
> Annotations that use fraction digits or significant digits might work in specific
> implementation-defined ways.
> Users should avoid depending on these types of keys in message selection.

Number literals in the MessageFormat 2 syntax use the 
[format defined for a JSON number](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259#section-6).

> The resolved value of an `operand` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`

Reviewer 4: I can't find anywhere where we define what "resolved value" means.

Author: The term "resolved value" lacks a formal definition, but the various sorts of resolved values are defined [here](https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/formatting.md#expression-and-markup-resolution) (in the formatting spec). This may be a gap.

I will do a PR with a formal definition because you're not the first to ask.

Reviewer 4: Sounds good.

>```

# Default Registry

This section describes the functions which each implementation MUST provide
to be conformant with this specification.

## String Value Selection and Formatting

### Functions

The following functions are provided:

The function `:string` provides string selection and formatting.

### Operands

The _operand_ is any _literal_ value
or an implementation-defined set of string or character-sequence types.
The value of a _literal_ does not include any quotes around the _literal_ and 
has converted any `quoted-escape` sequences to the escaped characters.
It does include any enclosed spaces or control characters.

> Examples of _literals_ and their values:
> | Literal | Value | Notes |
> |---|---|---|
> | \|1\| | `1` | Does not include quotes `\|` |
> | \|ab\\\|cd\| | `ab\|cd` | Unescape escaped `\|` |
> | hello | `hello` | Unquoted literal |
> | -13.2 | `-13.2` | Unquoted number-literal |
> | \| spaces \| | ` spaces ` | Includes one space before and after |

> [!NOTE]
> This should probably include individual character types, such as `char`.

In addition, implementations MAY perform formatting and selection on 

> `operand` values that do not otherwise have a formatting function registered.

Author: The Java note is not right (for example, probably subclasses of `java.lang.CharSequence`). 

In general this is better... and also approximately where we started.

> `operand` values that do not otherwise have a formatting function registered.

Reviewer: Very happy to have the Java note corrected. Note when doing so that `java.lang.CharSequence` is an interface rather than a class.

- Let `keys` be a list of strings containing keys to match.
  (Hint: this list is an argument to `MatchSelectorKeys`)
- For each string `key` in `keys`:
   - If the value of `key` is equal to the string value of `operand`
     then `key` matches the selector.
     A `key` and an `operand` are equal if they consist of the same
     sequence of Unicode code points.
     Add `key` to the front of the `return_value` list.
- Return `return_value`.

> [!NOTE]
> Matching of `key` and `operand` values is sensitive to the sequence of code points
> in each string.
> As a result, variations in how text can be encoded can affect the performance of matching.
> The function `:string` does not perform case folding or Unicode Normalization of string values.
> Users SHOULD encode _messages_ and their parts (such as _keys_ and _operands_),
> in Unicode Normalization Form C (NFC) unless there is a very good reason
> not to.
> See also: [String Matching](https://www.w3.org/TR/charmod-norm)

> [!NOTE]
> Unquoted string literals in a _variant_ do not include spaces.
> If users wish to match strings that include whitespace
> (including U+3000 `IDEOGRAPHIC SPACE`)

> > to a key, the `key` needs to be quoted.

Reviewer 5: Nitpick:
   s / needs to be quoted / MUST be quoted /
?

Reviewer: This is a non-normative note, so using MUST would be out of place.

For example, a naive developer might use a special message for the value `1` without
considering a locale's need for a `one` plural:
```
.match {$var}
1   {{You have one last chance}}
one {{You have {$var} chance remaining}} // needed by languages such as Polish or Russian
                                         // such locales typically require other keywords
                                         // such as two, few, many, and so forth
*   {{You have {$var} chances remaining}}
```

#### Percent Style
When implementing `style=percent`, the numeric value of the _operand_ 
MUST be multiplied by 100 for the purposes of formatting.

> For example,
> ```
> The total was {0.5 :number style=percent}.
> ```
> should format in a manner similar to:
> > The total was 50%.

### Selection

Number selection has three modes:
- `exact` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
- `plural` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
  or to plural rule categories if there is no explicit match
- `ordinal` selection matches the operand to explicit numeric keys exactly
  or to ordinal rule categories if there is no explicit match

> When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys`](formatting.md#resolve-preferences), 
> numeric selectors perform as described below.
> 
> - Let `return_value` be a new empty list of strings.
> - Let `operand` be the resolved value of the _operand_.
>   If the `operand` is not a number type, emit a _Selection Error_
>   and return `return_value`.
> - Let `keys` be a list of strings containing keys to match.
>   (Hint: this list is an argument to `MatchSelectorKeys`)
> - For each string `key` in `keys`:
>    - If the value of `key` matches the production `number-literal`:
>      - If the parsed value of `key` is an [exact match](#determining-exact-literal-match)
>        of the value of the `operand`, then `key` matches the selector.
>        Add `key` to the front of the `return_value` list.
>    - Else, if the value of `key` is a keyword:
>       - Let `keyword` be a string which is the result of [rule selection](#rule-selection).
>       - If `keyword` equals `key`, then `key` matches the selector.
>         Append `key` to the end of the `return_value` list.
>    - Else, `key` is invalid;
>      emit a _Selection Error_.
>      Do not add `key` to `return_value`.
> - Return `return_value`.
> 
> #### Plural/Ordinal Keywords
> The _plural/ordinal keywords_ are: `zero`, `one`, `two`, `few`, `many`, and
> `other`.

Reviewer: **Blocking**:
Rephrasing this the same way as for `:string` above. One nominal change in behaviour here is the ordering of exact matches, such that earlier exact matches are favoured over later exact matches. This does not have any effect with the current algorithm as that's requiring a very strong equality between `key` and `exact`, but it may have an effect as we consider #675.

Also inlining the section defining keywords, and moving up the note about implementation exactness.

```suggestion
When implementing [`MatchSelectorKeys(resolvedSelector, keys)`](/spec/formatting.md#resolve-preferences)
where `resolvedSelector` is the resolved value of a _selector_ _expression_
and `keys` is a list of strings,
numeric selectors perform as described below.

1. Let `exact` be the JSON string representation of the numeric value of `resolvedSelector`.
   (See [Determining Exact Literal Match](#determining-exact-literal-match) for details)
1. Let `keyword` be a string which is the result of [rule selection](#rule-selection) on `resolvedSelector`.
1. Let `resultExact` be a new empty list of strings.
1. Let `resultKeyword` be a new empty list of strings.
1. For each string `key` in `keys`:
   1. If the value of `key` matches the production `number-literal`, then
      1. If `key` and `exact` consist of the same sequence of Unicode code points, then
         1. Append `key` as the last element of the list `resultExact`.
   1. Else if `key` is one of the keywords `zero`, `one`, `two`, `few`, `many`, or `other`, then
      1. If `key` and `keyword` consist of the same sequence of Unicode code points, then
         1. Append `key` as the last element of the list `resultKeyword`.
   1. Else, emit a _Selection Error_.
1. Return a new list whose elements are the concatenation of the elements (in order) of `resultExact` followed by the elements (in order) of `resultKeyword`.

> [!NOTE]
> Implementations are not required to implement this exactly as written.
> However, the observed behavior must be consistent with what is described here.
```

#### Rule Selection

If the option `select` is set to `exact`, rule-based selection is not used.
Return the empty string.

> [!NOTE]

> > Since keys cannot be the empty string in a numeric selector, returning the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Since valid keys cannot be the empty string in a numeric expression, returning the
```

> empty string disables keyword selection.

If the option `select` is set to `plural`, selection should be based on CLDR plural rule data
of type `cardinal`. See [charts](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/latest/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html)
for examples.

If the option `select` is set to `ordinal`, selection should be based on CLDR plural rule data
of type `ordinal`. See [charts](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/latest/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html)
for examples.

Apply the rules defined by CLDR to the resolved value of the operand and the function options,
and return the resulting keyword.
If no rules match, return `other`.

> **Example.**
> In CLDR 44, the Czech (`cs`) plural rule set can be found
> [here](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/44/supplemental/language_plural_rules.html#cs).
>
> A message in Czech might be:
> ```
> .match {$numDays :number}
> one  {{{$numDays} den}}
> few  {{{$numDays} dny}}
> many {{{$numDays} dne}}
> *    {{{$numDays} dní}}
> ```

> > Using the rules found above, the results of various `operand` values might look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Using the rules found above, the results of various _operand_ values might look like:
```

> | Operand value | Keyword | Formatted Message |
> |---|---|---|
> | 1 | `one` | 1 den |
> | 2 | `few` | 2 dny |
> | 5 | `other` | 5 dní |
> | 22 | `few` | 22 dny |
> | 27 | `other` | 27 dní |
> | 2.4 | `many` | 2,4 dne |

#### Determining Exact Literal Match

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The exact behavior of exact literal match is only defined for non-zero-filled
> integer values.
> Annotations that use fraction digits or significant digits might work in specific
> implementation-defined ways.
> Users should avoid depending on these types of keys in message selection.

Number literals in the MessageFormat 2 syntax use the 
[format defined for a JSON number](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8259#section-6).

> The resolved value of an `operand` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`
> if, when the `operand` is serialized using the format for a JSON number,
> the two strings are equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `resolvedSelector` exactly matches a numeric literal `key`
if, when the numeric value of `resolvedSelector` is serialized using the format for a JSON number,
the two strings are equal.
```

> > [!NOTE]
> > Implementations are not expected to implement this exactly as written,
> > as there are clearly optimizations that can be applied.
> > However, the observed behavior must be consistent with what is described here.
> 

Reviewer: **Blocking**:
This note should be on the whole selection algorithm, see above.
```suggestion
```

> [!NOTE]
> Only integer matching is required in the Technical Preview.
> Feedback describing use cases for fractional and significant digits-based
> selection would be helpful.
> Otherwise, users should avoid using matching with fractional numbers or significant digits.

## Date and Time Value Formatting

This subsection describes the functions and options for date/time formatting.
Selection based on date and time values is not required in this release.

### Functions

Functions for formatting [date/time values](#operands) in the default registry are:

- `:datetime`
- `:date`
- `:time`

If no options are specified, each of the functions defaults to the following:
- `{$d :datetime}` is the same as `{$d :datetime dateStyle=short timeStyle=short}`
- `{$d :date}` is the same as `{$d :date style=short}`
- `{$t :time}` is the same as `{$t :time style=short}`

> [!NOTE]
> The default formatting behavior of `:datetime` is inconsistent with `Intl.DateTimeFormat`
> in JavaScript and with `{d,date}` in ICU MessageFormat 1.0.
> This is because, unlike those implementations, `:datetime` is distinct from `:date` and `:time`.

### Operands

The _operand_ of a date/time function is either 

> an implementation-defined date/time type (passed in as an argument)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an implementation-defined date/time type
```

For more information, see [Working with Timezones](https://w3c.github.io/timezone).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The [ABNF](/spec/message.abnf) and [syntax](/spec/syntax.md) of MF2
> do not formally define date/time literals. 
> This means that a _message_ can be syntactically valid but produce
> an _Operand Mismatch Error_ at runtime.

> [!NOTE]
> String values passed as variables in the _formatting context_'s
> _input mapping_ can be formatted as date/time values as long as their
> contents are date/time literals.
>
> For example, if the value of the variable `now` were the string
> `2024-02-06T16:40:00Z`, it would behave identically to the local
> variable in this example:
> ```
> .local $example = {|2024-02-06T16:40:00Z| :datetime}
> {{{$now :datetime} == {$example}}}
> ```

> [!NOTE]
> True time zone support in serializations is expected to coincide with the adoption
> of Temporal in JavaScript.
> The form of these serializations is known and is a de facto standard.
> Support for these extensions is expected to be required in the post-tech preview.
> See: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sedate-datetime-extended/

### Options

> A function can use either the appropriate _style_ options for that function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function can use either the appropriate _style options_ for that function
```

or can use a collection of _field options_ (but not both) to control the formatted 
output.

If both are specified, an _Invalid Expression_ error MUST be emitted
and a _fallback value_ used as the resolved value of the _expression_.

#### Style Options

> The function `:datetime` has these function-specific _style_ options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `:datetime` has these function-specific _style options_.
```

- `dateStyle`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short`
- `timeStyle`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short`

> The function `:date` has these function-specific _style_ options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `:date` has these function-specific _style options_:
```

- `style`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short` (default)

> The function `:time` has these function-specific _style_ options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function `:time` has these function-specific _style options_:
```

Author: "style options" is not a term.

```suggestion
The function `:time` has these function-specific _options_ for _style_:
```

Author: ```suggestion
The function `:time` has these function-specific _style options_:
```

No, I was wrong.

- `style`
  - `full`
  - `long`
  - `medium`
  - `short` (default)

#### Field Options

> Field options describe which fields to include in the formatted output
> and what format to use for that field.
> The implementation may use this _annotation_ to configure which fields
> appear in the formatted output.
> 
> > [!NOTE]
> > Field options do not have default values because they are only to be used
> > to compose the formatter.
> 
> The _field_ options are defined as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Field options_ describe which fields to include in the formatted output
and what format to use for that field.
The implementation may use this _annotation_ to configure which fields
appear in the formatted output.

> [!NOTE]
> _Field options_ do not have default values because they are only to be used
> to compose the formatter.

The _field options_ are defined as follows:
```
